# API stability of the generator

Understand the impact of updating the generator package plugin on the generated Swift code.

## Overview

Swift OpenAPI Generator generates client and server Swift code from an OpenAPI document. The generated code may change if the OpenAPI document is changed or a different version of the generator is used.

This document outlines the API stability goals for the generator to help you avoid unintentional build errors when updating to a new version of Swift OpenAPI Generator.

The components covered by these rules are:
- The name of the Swift OpenAPI Generator package plugin.
- The format of the config file provided to Swift OpenAPI Generator (plugin or CLI tool).
- The Swift OpenAPI Generator CLI tool arguments, options, and flags.

If you upgrade any of the components above to the next non-breaking version, your project should continue to build successfully. Check out how these rules are applied, and what a breaking change means for the generated code: <doc:API-stability-of-generated-code>.

### API stability

Since 1.0.0, the project follows [Semantic Versioning 2.0.0][0].

### Implementation details

In contrast to the guarantees provided for the API of Swift OpenAPI Generator, as defined above, below is a list of behaviors that are _not_ considered API, and are explicitly consider an implementation detail that can change without prior warning:

- The number and names of files generated by the Swift OpenAPI Generator CLI and plugins.
- The private types and methods provided by the OpenAPIRuntime library for generated code (marked with `@_spi(Generated)`).
- The business logic of the generated code, any code that isn't part of the API of the generated code.
- The diagnostics emitted by the generator, both their severity and printed description.

## See Also

- <doc:API-stability-of-generated-code>

[0]: https://semver.org
